Input Text:
-------------
page_content='Biological aging is a complex phenomenon consisting of loss of vitality and increased vulnerability that still lacks a shared definition and deep understanding. It is hypothesized that it can be originated by the decline of the force of natural selection with chronological age or that it is the consequence of a selection of traits that benefits a population or an ecosystem even if they are adverse to individual members. In a biological perspective, this mean that aging can be driven by the gradual accumulation of random molecular and cellular damage or that it is determined by a programmed process involving hundreds or thousands of genes acting with the purpose to eliminate older individuals from the population. Aging is also considered as a process that occurs independently by the disease of aging, by some scientists, or as the root cause of age-related diseases by others. In any case, aging remains the major cause of suffering and death worldwide and the proportion of the population affected by disabling chronic illness of aging is constantly increasing.

In this context, the development of treatments able to improve health and extend life span is highly desirable. A complete understanding of the underlying process of aging may be not necessary to start planning interventions able to reverse part of the damage that accumulates with aging, but the impact of these treatments may result to be minimal in terms of life- and health-span extension if we are not able to clearly disentangle beneficial compensatory phenomena that arise to counteract the damage associated with aging from the damage itself. A representative example of what this mean may be offered by the case of amyloid beta in Alzheimer’s disease. By one side, amyloid plaques have been considered as the cause of damage, and by another side, they are considered as a protective response to other underlying causes of the disease, so that the removal of amyloid may even worsen the disease. Unfortunately, the way most intracellular signaling pathways influence aging at a biochemical and metabolic level is still largely unknown. Under a certain point of view, it may appear a paradox that in the twenty-first century, we are still not able to definitively answer the question what is aging and why we age.

With this book, we would like to contribute to the efforts made in the attempt to clarify the mysteries that control aging by focusing on a specific aspect of this process. A common feature of aging, which is frequently used to define the process of aging itself, is the loss of homeostasis (the ability to maintain internal stability in the presence of challenges) with time. In this context, it should be noted that there are various homeostatic systems which, in turn, are differently affected by aging. One of these systems is metal homeostasis (metallostasis), which is kept by a multitude of binding, buffering, and transport proteins that are highly affected by aging. The age-related loss of metallostasis appears to be a conserved phenomenon across multiple species, and there is substantial evidence that alterations in metal abundance modulate life span in humans as well as in most common animal models used in aging studies, such as rats, mice, worms, and flies.

This multi-chapter review book presents the present state of knowledge on the role of minerals and trace elements in health, aging, and longevity. The book is divided into 11 chapters, each dedicated to a specific mineral or trace element and a final chapter dedicated to the optimal and the nadir ranges of the micronutrients. All chapters have a title dedicated to a mineral or element: iron, copper, selenium, zinc, chromium, molybdenum, sodium, magnesium, and iodine. Each chapter consists of an in-depth review on the impact of each mineral or element on molecular and physiological processes of aging, with a focus on clinical, animal, and other laboratory models of interest in aging.

Engrained with the up-to-date information about role of trace elements and minerals in health, aging, and longevity, this collection is a valuable addition to the book series “Healthy Ageing and Longevity” and provides a reliable source of information and knowledge useful for understanding and developing potential interventions for modulating aging and longevity.  
Ancona, Italy Marco Malavolta Eugenio Mocchegiani  
-----' metadata={'Header 2': 'Trace Elements and Minerals in Health and Longevity', 'Header 4': 'Preface'}